emergency lights are going off sirens
blaring
the spaceship is shaking like crazy the
cosmic darkness beyond the portholes
is illuminated by pulsating flashes
the astronauts are strapping themselves
in and looking at the screens cold sweat
breaking on their foreheads straight
ahead
space is cut in half by a blinding beam
nothing in the universe can stop it it
looks like a humongous airplane jet
stream
millions of times more powerful than any
jet could make
there's no way to go around it the
leader of the space expedition orders
everyone to turn around immediately
that was a black hole jet a real monster
of space
the holes like huge vacuum cleaners
swallow
everything that falls beyond their event
horizon the boundary between space-time
and the place where it disappears if you
find yourself close to this border
you're doomed
even light can't escape the gravity of a
black hole
and it's the fastest thing in the
universe
the holes not only absorb matter but
also
shoot jets into space mysterious beams
thousands of light years long there are
no black monsters near the earth
but let's imagine if one suddenly popped
up
close to the sun the hole immediately
starts devouring the star
strong gravity pulls one side of the sun
more than the other
the hole tears the sun into ribbons
eating it just as you would eat
spaghetti off your plate
physicists call this phenomenon
spaghettification
when the monsters finished its meal it
hiccups
and like laser swords two jets
cut our galaxy in half
astronomers are observing a similar
catastrophe right now
billions of light years away from us a
black hole
from the 3c321 system is bombarding a
nearby galaxy
with a jet of x-rays gamma rays and
electrons
accelerated to the speed of light the
onslaught has been going on for a
million years
and we're lucky it's taking place at a
safe distance
if a jet comes close to a planet similar
to earth it'll vaporize the atmosphere
and the ozone layer all life on the
surface will disappear
only deep underground dwellers will
survive
if a black hole does appear next to the
sun though
we won't live long enough to see the jet
the monster will absorb the energy of
the star and we'll simply lose
all heat and light the earth will cool
down
delving into eternal darkness
but like anything else jets can do good
things too
like fertilizers helping crops to grow
the energy of the rays
squeeze the space clouds and new stars
will be born from them
imagine a drain in the bathroom through
which water flows into a pipe
the water moves in a spiral and some of
it rotates around the hole
now imagine that the black hole is the
same drain
and instead of water there's the stuff
called plasma
it spins rapidly gets magnetized and
collects
into a huge accretion disk plasma starts
to glow
and at some point shoots two streams
into space
the black hole v404 cygni lies eight
thousand light years away it's like a
firework display
that weighs as much as 10 suns the
problem is
they forgot to install it securely and
the wick
was prematurely set on fire
the hole is powered by gas from a nearby
star
it provides infinite charges for the
space fireworks
the v404 jets don't just fire from the
poles
but in every direction a disc as wide as
seven suns
is spinning around the black hole the
inside of the disc
is wobbling like a top that's about to
stop spinning and fall
scientists believe the wobbles and
random shots
are caused by distortions of the
space-time continuum
black holes are not the only ones who
know how to put on a space show
their main competitors are gamma ray
bursts
science doesn't know exactly how they
appear most likely
it's because of the decay of a huge star
or the collision of neutron stars
satellites record
one gamma ray burst every day but at
least
500 outbreaks occur in the universe
within the same time period
an amateur astronomer first seeing the
observable universe
may feel like a movie star on the red
carpet
only they'll be blinded not by the
lights from the cameras of journalists
and fans
but by constant gamma ray bursts
if there is a flash near the earth our
planet
will feel like a candle in a snowstorm
imagine that you live in the future and
can take off on safe
interstellar flights on your spaceship
you fly to a planet that looks like
earth
to see a gamma ray burst with your own
eyes
your ship is cutting into outer space
and landing on the planet in question
as soon as you step on its soil though
you feel it
every living thing in this world is
waiting for something terrible to happen
frightened birds are flying through the
sky animals start running out of the
forests and looking for shelter
the wind makes the leaves rustle and
it's like they're whispering to you
save yourself get out of here then
the wind grows stronger and turns into a
storm
a bright flash appears on the horizon
after a few seconds the light
intensifies
someone huge has turned on space flood
lights
everything is lost there is only light
as much
energy is released in one second as our
sun generates
in 10 billion years
ten seconds pass and the show is over
the planet is moving through space and
the flash has only hit
a part of its southern hemisphere but
that's enough for things to go
badly the gamma ray burst was a pretty
short one
so it probably wouldn't have vaporized
the oceans or blown away the atmosphere
but the ozone layer which protects the
planet from the rays of the nearest star
and cosmic radiation
still disappears all life in this world
abruptly ends the picture is terrible
but there's no need for us to panic just
yet
scientists believe the probability of a
similar catastrophe on our planet
is zero but the earth hasn't always been
so lucky
the ordovician extinction occurred 450
million years ago
perhaps a gamma ray burst was to blame
its epicenter was 6 000 light years away
from earth
harmful uv light hit the planet's
surface
reducing the ozone layer by 40 percent
more than half the plants and animals
disappeared
but life continued to develop and after
200 million years
dinosaurs began roaming the planet
ada carina is a hyper giant double star
it's almost 200 times heavier than the
sun
and in 10 seconds it emits as much light
as the sun
in a year it's as far as 7 500 light
years away from earth
but in 1843 dwellers of our planet
saw it in the night sky without
telescopes
this was possible thanks to an explosion
these beautiful clouds of gas and dust
are the consequences
of those events we can say these are
huge ruins of a star
but they look cool
over the next 1 million years ada karina
will continue exploding and form a gamma
ray burst
but even here humanity needn't worry
the direction of the gas clouds
indicates that the future
burst beams won't hit the earth
[Music]
our planet is under siege right now 30
million
space objects varying in size from a
grain of sand
to a car are flying towards the earth
but our atmosphere burns all border
violators
scientists are constantly monitoring
space
and they haven't found a single space
rock potentially hazardous for humanity
but this doesn't mean it doesn't exist a
huge asteroid
arrives to earth once every two million
years
on average here are the surfaces of the
moon
mars and mercury craters
cover them like cheese holes these are
the tracks of asteroids that have been
bombarding their surface
for millions of years
an atmosphere is an excellent barrier
against the rock shower from the skies
but every year around 500 large objects
still make their way through it most of
them fall into the ocean
or sparsely populated areas and remain
unknown geological activity continues on
the planet
the continents move mountains rise and
fall
as you watch this video the landscape of
the earth
is changing all of this erases all
traces of meteorites that have fallen on
the planet